---
layout: post
title: Building your network
tags: [level-up, freelance, network]
---

*Disclaimer*: This article contains a lot of bragging about how I'm better than you. The good news is, it also tells you how to become better than me.

One of the most common question I've been asked since I became a freelancer is: **how do you find clients?** This is an interesting question that I've been wondering myself before taking the leap, and I'm going to tell you the naked truth about it: I don't find clients, they find me. That's right. Ever since I began freelancing, almost one year ago, **I have spent exactly 0 hours looking for clients**.

So how do you achieve that? It's simple, **you build a network** around you. Building a network is easy once you consciously commit to it, but it's a bit like these overnight startup successes: **it takes a long time** to get it right. I feel it's important that you do it though, even if you're not a freelancer, because having a good network is the single best thing that happened to me in my career. Not only does it allow me to not look for clients now that I am freelance, but it also allowed me to meet amazing people who helped me level up my technical skills, it helped me develop and polish my social skills, and it also helped me landing my dream-jobs (that is, before I realise that my dream-job is not having a job).

I've been a developper for more than half of my life now, and professionally so for a good 10 years. I've worked for several companies back in the days when switching jobs every year was seen as a sign of instability. Everyone told me *dude, you gotta settle somewhere or nobody's going to take you seriously anymore*, and I was like *yeah, whatever*. At the time, I only though of the *learning* advantages. Each time I changed job, I ended up at the bottom of the technical ladder (that was particularly true at SensioLabs, where I felt like I was not gonna make it since the technical level was so crushingly high). Turns out people seem to have taken me seriously all right, since almost **every single one of my former employers became a client** of my freelancing gig. And I didn't even have to ask. They just somehow learned I was taking contracts and came to ask me if I was available. I also met and kept in touch with some of the greatest minds in the PHP community by just, you know, working for or with them. The great thing with former employers is they know you, they know your skills, they know how you work. Of course, you have to have been a good employee, but that's something you're doing even without a second though, right? The only thing you have to do is keeping in touch and let them know you're taking contracts. Which brings us to...

The second best thing to build your network is to **be visible**. Thanks Captain Obvious, but what does that mean exactly and how do you do that? You are visible when people know that you exist and what your skills are. Being visible is the easiest thing to do: you just have to talk (or write). Whatever technology you work with, there's most certainly a local user group about it near you. Just check [Meetup](http://meetup.com/), find a group, and start attending. Passively attending is a good start, but it's not going to get you anywhere, so at some point you need to become active. Start proposing talks, engage with people, ask questions, be genuinely interested in what people have to say. Meetups really are a great way to connect with the local community, and to practice your public skills. Public talking in particular is a skill you can't overestimate when it comes to building your network and getting noticed.

And what if there's no user group, I hear you ask? Create one. **Build your own opportunities.** It's really not that hard. I've created – or helped create – plenty: the french speaking Symfony user group ([AFSY](http://www.meetup.com/afsy-sfpot/)), the very first [local AFUP outlet in Lyon](http://lyon.afup.org/), [the Docker Meetup in Lyon](http://www.meetup.com/Docker-Lyon/), etc. Most people are just waiting for someone to do something. And even if you don't feel like managing a user group in the long time, you don't have to! Most of the time, you can find amazing people to take the lead once you kickstarted the thing (if you check the user groups I mentioned, you'll notice I don't manage any of them anymore).

Local user groups are great, but let's aim at something a little bit higher: national conferences. Once you've practiced your public talking skills at your local user groups, you should be ready to take on **more ambitious challenges**. Chances are there are national user groups or full-blown association around the technology you use (for example in France we have the amazing [AFUP](http://www.afup.org/)). Check them out, and see if they're organising national events. PHP developers in France would quickly find the Forum PHP and the PHP Tour, both organised by the aforementioned AFUP. They are national events held mostly in french. Speaking at this sort of events will skyrocket your reputation through the roof. Really. Don't believe me? I've been attending a lot of events in the past years, up to the point where people I don't know walk up to me and say nice things like *hi, I saw your talk at \[some other events\], can't wait for you talk of today*, *hey Geoffrey, are you available for a freelance gig next week?*, or *I see you did not submit to this year's Forum PHP yet, we'd love to have you there so move your ass already and submit something!*, or even *come here so I can kick your sorry ass at foosball*, which, for the record, is a very cool way to socialise.

And we're not talking about complete John Does here. Renowned people from the community, managers in some of the greatest french tech companies (not the confused with the crappy *La FrenchTech*, mind you), developers in companies you'd dream of working at. People I never would have imagined would bother about me, actually know me – and want to hire me – because of my talks.

Ok, now that you're starting to get noticed at events, you need to capitalise on this. The best way to do this is to manage your online presence, and for this, you will need to write. There are several ways to do it, some more efficient than others. As a general rule of thumbs, the more time an activity takes, the more efficient it will be. Personally, I manage my online presence via two main channels: twitter and this blog. Twitter is great because it's easy, and with time, you can make awesome friends and connections over there. But twitter isn't going to get you the best leads or greatest reputation boosts. Maintaining a blog will. Regular updates and knowledge-packed blog posts will go a long way in establishing your reputation as an expert and spreading it across the world. But remember that building an audience takes a lot of time. Don't expect leads or fame to rain on you just because you published a few great blog posts. **Maintaining a blog is hard.** But rewarding. And don't forget that it's actually a two-ways thing. Your readers are going to learn from you, and you are going to learn from your readers, everyone wins.

One last thing. The number one reason people give when asked why they don't speak at events is [the impostor syndrome](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Impostor_syndrome). Thoughts like *I'm not an expert in my field, why would people listen to me?* or *I have nothing interesting to speak about* are very common, and also **complete bullshit**. 

You don't imagine how people, especially in our field, are craving for knowledge. For example, there's an (awesome) company in Lyon called [Elao](http://www.elao.com/fr/) that organises each week the *Elao Talks*. It's a mini-event where anyone can submit a talk about virtually anything, and present it during the lunch hour. Because I love speaking and – let's be honest – being the center of attention, I proposed two talks: *How the blockchain works* and *The nuclear fusion*. Do you think I am an expert in the Bitcoins or nuclear physics? Well I'm not. I happen to be interested in both, though, and so do a lot more people than you'd think. My talks were maybe not models of precision and correctness, but they seem to have had their little success. Or maybe it's that everyone didn't want to be mean to me, I don't know.

The golden rule to build a reputation is that **being an expert does not allow you to speak, speaking makes you an expert**. And by speaking, I mean not only speaking but also writing. Do you think I am an expert at [Docker](http://docker.com/)? If yes, ask yourself why you think that? Is it because you know me personally and you've actually seen me do crazy amazing things with Docker? Or is it because you know I give talks and wrote a book about it? What gave me the legitimacy to gave those talks and write this book? Nothing. I took it. I decided that I wanted to be perceived as an expert in this particular field, and set out to do whatever people are expecting from experts: speaking, giving (hopefully informed) opinions, teaching, writing a book. And it worked. I've already landed a few gigs thanks to the talks I give and the book I wrote about Docker. I often tell people I'm a huge impostor because I do a lot of things like speaking and writing about subjects I don't yet fully master. But you know what? It's by doing all these things that I end up mastering these subjects.

So, what are you waiting for to go public? Start now, attend the next local user-group meetup, write a new blog post article, submit a talk to an upcoming conference, you don't have any excuse!