---
layout: post
title: Level up
tags:
- way of life
- levelup
---

I don't often take new year resolutions, but this year the timing seems good. I've been thinking about it for a few weeks already, and I guess it doesn't hurt to formalise it.

**In 2015, I am going to level up.**

No, I am not going back full time to WoW. I am going to level up in real life. How does one level up exactly? First thing to do is to define exactly what *levelling up* means to you. For example, to me it means:

* working more efficiently
* coding less, but better
* learning new things
* discovering new things

Thing is, I feel like I've been stagnating for too long. Yes, I did some interesting things and learnt a few exciting technologies in the past years. I gradually became *comfortable* with Symfony2 and its eco-system, I learnt – [and released a book](/books/discovering-docker.html) about – Docker and I released a couple projects, from which I gained a lot of insight on *shipping*. But aside from that, not much. I'm still writing the same sort of code, in basically the same language.

So this year, everything's changing. There are a few areas that particularly interest me:

* all this *devops* thing
* learning new languages
* being *full-stack*
* entrepreneurship in general

These are all *personal* interests that I wish to research, just because I enjoy them.

Or so I though. Levelling up actually has a deeper meaning this year. I recently read [Stop thinking like a freelancer](https://www.freelancelift.com/1m-freelancer-book/), a fantastic ebook about, well, stopping thinking like a freelancer and getting to real business. I was already leaning this way, but the book really sold me. There's one thing in particular that I did not think of by myself, and it is to define goals. I always took life as it came, day after day – people who know me well can tell how carefree I can be. Until now.

In this respect, *levelling up* also means *setting, and reaching, goals* to me.

Setting goals has the power to give meaning to things you do. So while learning new things *for fun* is good and a necessary part of everyday's life, starting from now I will also be setting myself goals to reach, effectively making my other interests supporting this greater goal. Setting goals will also help give structure to what I do, why and how. Hopefully, this should make everything else I do more meaningful.

The main objective I'm going to set myself is simple:

**Be a better version of myself.**

Ok that's a bit meta, so what does it mean exactly? Several things, in no particular order:

* **Be a better developper.** That's where the *learning stuff* kicks in.
* **Be a better entrepreneur.** I've launched a few *things* in 2014, all of them having not necessarily failed, but they certainly were not successful. I've learned a lot of things already, and I'm going to keep learning until I get it right.
* **Be a better friend.** Everyone has its personal vision of what a good friend is. For me, it's being there for your friends. Listen attentively when they're talking to you, and help them out whenever they need to.
* **Be a better customer.** That's right. Building products has taught me a lot of things, one of them being that people just don't care about your products, or, by all means, give the impression that they don't care. That's been the most painful insight for me. This also applies to real life *customering*.
* **Be a better public figure.** And I don't mean getting more followers. I mean stopping being a smart-ass, getting my facts checked, not yelling at people (without a good reason), that sort of things. Think more before I talk or post something publicly.
* **Be a better citizen.** This one's gonna be tough, since I'm not even living in my home country, but I have a few ideas already that I will share with you very soon.
* **Be a better traveler.** I know there is no such thing as a *good* or a *bad* traveler (*wink wink*), but I'm currently not satisfied with the way I do it, so I'm going to improve this. Not sure what that means yet, maybe meeting more people? Seeing more things? *Doing* more things? We'll see.

These are some goals I'm setting myself this year. I'm not saying I'm bad in any of these particular areas, I'm just saying, well, maybe I can be better. Of course you can (almost) *always* be better at something, so I'll just have to keep in mind that I am not looking for perfection, just improvement. These goals are still a bit meta, and there's still a bit of work to do to get actual, actionable goals, but I'll get there eventually, so stay tuned.

There is another goal that I want to set myself, and I firmly believe achieving the other goals will mechanically achieve this one:

**Spend more time on things that really matter to me.**

That means my friends and my family of course, but also more meaningful projects. Because yes, I am pretty sure *a better version of myself* would spend more time on these.

And you, who do you want to be in 2015?

{% include level-up.html %}